And we'd love to be able to have questions for you within that.
Absolutely. So just by way of introduction, my name
is Sarah Wilson, and I'm the General Manager of Advocacy at New Zealand
Winegrowers. For those who may not be familiar with us, we're the peak
industry body representing New Zealand's 1,400 grape growers and
winemakers. I'll just very briefly speak to a couple of the points in our
submission. I won't restate the whole submission.
New Zealand Winegrowers is supportive of the passage of modern slavery legislation
in New Zealand.
Our industry does not tolerate worker exploitation, and we support our
members to meet their domestic and international obligations in this regard.
As part of this, we publish guidance to assist businesses meet their, to meet those
obligations, such as a voluntary code of practice for our people and through our
sustainability program, Sustainable Winegrowing New Zealand.
What we're seeing through our experience of operating that program is an increasing
trend of market gatekeepers and non-governmental organizations
requiring additional sustainability measures, particularly those
related to people, workforce, and social aspects.
Today, I would just like to briefly summarize two of the points
of particular relevance to our sector.
The first, that any overseas reporting requirements already in place should
be recognized and be allowed to be used to reduce duplication,
such as by the use of equivalent statements.
If requirements are overly prescriptive and do not account for good work that's
already being done, there's a risk that it will add cost without necessarily
improving outcomes.
Secondly, while the legislation is of course focused on reporting entities, it's
important to consider the impacts that may occur throughout the supply chain,
including to small businesses, and it will be important to ensure that any flow on
impacts to those businesses are not unduly burdensome.
We believe that education has an important role to play here to help all those
businesses come up to speed with any additional requirements from this
legislation, and such an education sector approach should not be
solely focused on reporting entities that are, or may be impacted in
some way.
Thank you again for the opportunity to submit, and I'm very happy to take any
questions that you may have.
Hmm. I'll use my prerogative, Sarah, just
to chip in with one starting question.
Do you know if any of your members are currently reporting in
other international markets?
Yes, absolutely. We do have a number of
businesses meeting a variety of different requirements, if I can put it that
way. So,
for example, some of those international gatekeepers are increasingly
imposing, uh, im-imposing various
requirements in this area, but there's a lack of consistency internationally.
So that fragmentation is-
Hmm
... creating, often quite a lot of, compliance
administration, if I can put it that way.
But, but yes, certainly a number of our members are already engaging with these
types of requirements in the international space.
Hmm. In the, in the likes of Australia, the UK, Europe?
Yes, absolutely. They're all significant export markets for our members.
Right. Okay. Thank you. Greg, you look like you're champing at the bit, my friend.
Yeah, just picking up on that question there, Phil.
What, uh, have you got some examples of, of the, of
unhelpful complexities or burdens that are coming through on, on the, on
the, some of the reporting that, some of the members are, are already having to,
having to perform?
One example is, is, is, just that there are not, that the
requirements are not harmonized.
So you've got requirements coming from retailers or importers, you've got
requirements coming from, from governments, and then you've got requirements
from, in, in some cases, for example, in the Nordic countries, their
liquor monopolies. So specifically in the alcohol space there are monopoly
retailers, and so they kind of sit in that in-between space between
government and private sector, and they will set, effectively,
market access requirements. So it's just that divergence that in and of itself is a
challenge.
More specifically, what we've been engaging with through our sustainability program
is around,
increasingly, countries that don't recognize a risk-based approach or
recognize a local context. So, for example, one of the,
the Nordic sustainability programs we've been working with at the moment, they
no longer account for existing protective measures and local
legislation. From their perspective, they consider those to be not relevant
and require those to be duplicated by a sustainability scheme.
Hmm.
Have you, any thoughts on the current threshold or the proposed
threshold of $100 million? Do you think that's about right, or would you want to
see that adjusted?
We don't have any specific comments on the threshold.
If it was to be materially changed, then that's something I think we'd, we'd hope
would be consulted on again if there was a significant difference.
Right. Okay. And then what about director liability?
You'll be aware that under the proposed legislation, there'll be, there's,
individual directors could be exposed to a criminal prosecution.
I don't think we've specifically addressed that point in our submission.
We'd probably defer to the submission of, of Business New Zealand-
Business New Zealand
... on those, those particular topics.
Yeah, great. Okay. Thank you very much.
So Sarah, I'm guessing that
quite a few of your members would be selling into,
companies who are reporting entities in those other markets,
right? So they're gonna be, those entities are gonna be
requiring, some of your members to
satisfy them by, you know, I guess they send them a questionnaire or something like
that saying, "We have to report on, on modern slavery.
Can you give us a report on the, on the products that you're selling to us?" Is
that right?
Yes, absolutely.
Hmm. So it's a good example of how, how a, a,
a regime like this or like what the Australians have, cascades down
through
a lot of suppliers.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Okay, any other questions, colleagues?
That's great. Thank you.
Okay. Thanks, Sarah. Very helpful.
Thank you all. Take care.
Great.
SureOkay.
Next up we've got Ralph Simpson.
Yeah, morning, committee.
Hello, Ralph.
I may be one of the few
members or submitters who've actually worked at the
coalface on human trafficking. So I was working in Asia and Africa for
five years from
2015 to 2019. Also worked for Fletcher
Building for six years, so I know what the constraints on big business
is. And on top of that, I was a partner in a law firm, a major law firm, for
30 years. So I have four points. Modern slavery
laws like this have no measurable impact on
trafficking in persons and nor will they ever.
It's totally unrealistic. I understand that the
international pressure on us to align ourselves
with similar legislation in other countries, but let's be candid with one
another, particularly on international supply chains, this
legislation does not work. That was noted by the MB paper.
And
in one sense, if it was able to work, one would've expected to see
that in the annual reports filed by companies where they can say,
"We found slavery in our supply chain and we stopped it."
And you just do not see that anywhere.
Number two, imposing obligations like this on the business community
is unrealistic and frankly unfair, particularly when the state is so
woefully underperforming as noted in the US
state TIP report.
And third, my point is that we should focus on exploitation
that is going on in New Zealand, as noted in the trafficking in persons report from
the US State Department, and clean up our own backyard.
And that's really more of a government issue than a business issue.
The last thing I want to touch on briefly, and I'll just mention it now,
I suggest clauses 28 and 29 of the bill be amended.
At the moment it says where a company has
breached its obligations, the Crown can make no payments
under the Public Finance Act, and there's no sunset clause on
that. So I think I'd suggest that that prohibition
applies for 24 or say 36 months, but not be completely
open-ended into infinity. So I think that's just a tweak that needs to
be done. So, listen, let's deal with the first point.
Modern slavery laws are ineffective.
Walk Free suggest there's 50 million victims, although
that is largely guesswork. But,
if one looks at, for example, the UNODC biannual report on
trafficking, there's minimum examples of its success.
So, the number of victims detected, that's
people that have actually been identified as trafficking victims
from 2020 to 2023, so four years, was
202,000
out of the 50 million.
The number of persons prosecuted, 48,000.
The number of persons convicted, 15 or nearly
16,000. And they are largely foot soldiers, so not
the people in the shadows making the big money, but rather
foot soldiers that are readily replaced.
So you can see from that that even when we're talking about the
UN, EU, law enforcement with resources,
statutory investigative and arrest powers, ability to phone
tap and do all the other things that modern law enforcement agencies can
do, the impact is
minimal. You will not stop international trafficking,
and claims to the contrary are delusionary.
So
let's try and focus on what we can do, and that is domestic
modern slavery activities, particularly in construction,
horticulture, including the grape growers industry,
and also where we've got
in the, what do I call it, the entertainment industry, like
restaurants,
brothels, et cetera, where that sort of thing can go on and where we
can do something about it. And really that's going to require
the government to spend some money.
We need labor inspectors to be interviewing migrant
workers, checking they've still got their official
documents, passports, et cetera, that their accommodation is
appropriate, that they are receiving the wages they were promised.
And there's quite a lot of work to be done in that area.
But to expect companies to do that is utterly impossible.
And I have been working with TF Fund a little, and I respect them and World
Vision, but the suggestion that we should introduce due diligence
is frankly laughable and unrealistic.
They refer me to the UN document on how to undertake
due diligence, and it is just woeful.
It just does not answer the questions.
And when we know that there is modern slavery in the supply chain for
solar panels and for cobalt used in the production
of, and manufacturing of rechargeable lithium
batteries, if you're serious about this, you will stop.
No electronics into the country with lithium batteries.
So that's EVs, hybrids, computers, phones, all have to
stop. Are we seriously saying that? And it's the same with solar panels.
It's notorious that the Muslim minorities in China are being
used to produce the raw ingredients for solar panels.
Are we really saying, bearing in mind, I think,
98% of solar wafers come from China, that we will
stop importing solar panels? You need to be very careful with this
legislation because you're asking companies to do things that you really don't
want them to do.
I can't imagine any
government party or parliamentary party
seriously suggesting that we stop importing lithium
rechargeable batteries or solar panels.
And it's the same with complex things like, if we
just take a power drill, battery-powered power drillHow far do you
want businesses to go back in their auditing of their supply chains?
Are we going all the way back to mining the raw materials that make aluminum and
steel and plastics? These are huge obligations, and the
suggestion that companies somehow are supposed to do
due diligence and stop this modern slavery, and that
directors should be prosecuted when the government is so woefully
behind in dealing with its own domestic issues
is frankly unfair and unrealistic.
Ralph, thank you. I've got to stop you there, unfortunately, because that is a very
challenging and interesting submission, and I wish we had more time to discuss
it. But we will give it serious thought.
So thank you very much.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Okay. Next up, we have, I think, Charlie from Vic
Labour. Charlie, you've got
10 minutes, and we would like to have some time for questions if possible.
Yeah. Kia ora koutou. And thank you, Ralph.
I resonate with much of what you said, especially with those domestic issues.
Yeah. So my name's Charlie, Charlie Kadri. I'm from Vic Labour.
I'm the Māori vice chair.
Vic Labour is the youth branch of the Labour Party here in Te Whanganui-a-Tara, and
we consist of students in Mangatahi.
Yeah, I'd like to thank you guys for the opportunity, special opportunity to speak
on this historic piece of legislation.
I'd like to thank Carmela Belich from Labour and
Greg Fleming from National for bringing this forward in a uniquely bipartisan
approach.
I remember the
last year of my high school in sociology, wondering if this bill would ever come to
fruition. So I'd like to thank you both for your efforts in bringing this bill to
the House.
So Vic Labour widely supports the Modern Slavery Bill, what it intends to do in
being able to identify, address, mitigate, and remediate the
harm and injustices caused by modern slavery that exists within our supply
chains.
There is two points of criticism in this bill, though, that I'd like to bring
forward. So we are concerned that by excluding all businesses below
$100 million of revenue, modern slavery will continue to
persist in our supply chains.
The threshold excludes the vast majority of New Zealand businesses who can be
just as reliant on those supply chains.
And so we would recommend that the Select Committee consider the
consultation with MBI in 2022, which proposes a
staggered bracketing of revenue and responsibilities,
so more proportionate to businesses and
what they can do to remediate modern slavery.
We are also concerned about the decision not to introduce further penalties.
This is because businesses may not be encouraged to improve practices from
only simply providing statements.
They might just begin viewing it as simply box-checking,
another part of business. So while we do appreciate that
transparency is great, we appreciate that, but if
we want to encourage real change, we will need penalties that are ready.
And so kind of two penalties that we sort of go through in our submission that can
be introduced is something like a penalty for high reliance.
So that's being if you go above a certain threshold, you
are deemed high reliant and you're penalized for that.
And then a penalty for continued engagement.
So that can be a reoccurring engagement below another set
penalty in subsequent years.
This wasn't in our written submission, but I would also ask the
committee to consider if these
penalties go far enough.
Maximum fines are 600,000 in New Zealand
in this bill, and so
that is .6% of the $100 million of revenue for those
businesses that need to provide a report.
If we're to look over at New South Wales, we've got a maximum fine of 1.1
million, and those are businesses with $50 million
of revenue, so half that of what we're doing.
And so I think this is an important part to remind the committee
that we are talking about big businesses here, right?
So these are businesses with $100 million exceeding in
revenue. They are by far capable.
They have resources to provide a report and be on their way.
And if they don't provide a report, there's a relatively small fine compared to
their revenue. So we can afford to strengthen our compliance settings
and penalties applied to these big businesses for the moral good
of addressing the injustices of modern slavery.
And not doing so risks undermining the intent of this bill.
So besides these kind of recommendations and considerations, what we hope the
Select Committee take into account and integrate in some way, we
strongly support the bill and view the bill as a historic
step in the right direction. Yeah, happy to take questions.
Thanks, Charlie. Colleagues, any questions?
Greg.
No, that was very, very clear. Thank you very much for both that, our
submission, and also for the
clarity of your written submission as well.
Maybe one, seeing as that you did hear the previous
submitter, do you have any thoughts on essentially what, when you
talk in your submission about your desire
to see companies do more than just report, you're essentially
asking them for a form of due diligence, which is the
thing that Ralph pushed back very hard on based on his
experience,
both working internationally and then also representing one of New
Zealand's largest corporates. Have you got any thoughts on that?
Well, I think that the contents of the modern slavery
statement that's in this bill,
a
lot of it's by interpretation. So there's no,
like-Set way of providing a
report, which I will assume that there will be a bit more guidance once it actually
comes.
Yeah.
But there it's not much.
You simply have to identify where those supply chains are
that engage with modern slavery, and then give that in the statement,
which I can imagine businesses with a hundred millions in revenue can do
like any other report that they've got to give to government.
Yeah. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you again. Thanks very much, Charlie.
I appreciate your passion for this and the amount of time that
you've invested in it.
Thank you for your time. Thank you.
Thanks, Charlie. Good stuff.
Thank you.
Cool.
Okay, next up is Citizens Advice Bureau, Louise
and Gwyneth. Welcome to our subcommittee.
You've got
10 minutes, and we would love to have a chance to have a couple of minutes for
questions within that time.
Great.
Kia ora. All right, just trying to-- I think I can see everything. Yeah.
So my name's Gwyneth Kerry-Smith.
I am the National Data Analyst for Citizen Advice Bureau, New Zealand.
I'm here with my colleague, Louise May, the National Policy Advisor.
So we will take our submission as read and just use this time to
highlight our key points. Firstly, just a brief overview
of the Citizen Advice Bureau.
So we're a national wide, locally based community organization
providing free, confidential and independent information,
advice and support to the public.
We're in 80 locations across the Motu, and our service is
provided by 2,000 trained volunteers.
Our service is for everyone, and we assist with whatever issue a
person brings to us. So over the past year, our CABs have helped
with over 300,000 client inquiries on issues
such as employment, immigration, housing,
relationships, consumer problems and heaps more.
Every time a CAB volunteer assists a person, they enter the
detail of the inquiry and the help they gave them into our
inquiry database. And this information gives us a
rich insight into the issues that are impacting people across our society.
So we use what we learn from our clients to speak to our law,
policies and services that uphold people's rights and strengthen their
wellbeing.
So the CAB is a key source of help for people who have come to New
Zealand for employment, only to find themselves in
exploitative work situations. So several
years ago, we started tracking in our client inquiry data those
cases where migrant worker exploitation or trafficking appears to
be occurring. And we started doing this because CABs
across Aotearoa were telling us that they were seeing more
people in these situations, and that there is a lack of the support
that people need to be able to
easily move out of these vulnerable situations and not experience
further harm.
Over a two-year period, our volunteers have responded to around
1,000 of these inquiries, and so we have analyzed those, and they
provide a base for our submission and our
recommendations for this bill.
So when New Zealanders hear the term modern slavery, they
probably tend to think of something that happens elsewhere, not here in
Aotearoa. Unfortunately, modern slavery
is happening on our shores. It has been for some time,
and it's not just a few outlier cases, it's a systemic problem,
and our client data shows this.
So in analyzing these
1,000 cases, we see situations where people are
working in conditions that appear to meet the definition of modern slavery,
where they're being used and controlled by their employer as if their
employer owns them.
So we have people whose employers make them work
long days, seven days a week, with no time to be with their children,
spouse, family or friends.
Employers who hold their passports,
hold their bank cards and control their money, don't pay them enough to
survive on and steal from their wages.
Who set them up in employer provided accommodation
that is also unhealthy and unsafe.
And they don't let them make phone calls out of earshot, don't let them leave the
workplace for vital appointments, phone them at all hours of the day and
night,
and move them around the country without the worker having any say in the matter.
They also can threaten them with their visa status that will be revoked, that they
will be deported, or their family in their home country will be harmed by
associates or family of the employer.
And that's if they complain, report their situation or try to leave.
So these people are living and working under these conditions here
in New Zealand. They are not free. They are enslaved.
So we know that this problem is systematic because we
see these situations like this around the
country across a range of industries.
For example, hospitality, primary industries,
retail, cleaning, beauty and
personal care industries, and also in the trades.
So we know the problem is underreported because workers who are stepping forward
to get our help often tell us that their coworkers are--
They're usually in New Zealand on work visas as well, they've been subjected to the
same treatment.We also have clients who need our help but do
not want their circumstances recorded in any way for fear
of retribution. So those cases are also not ending up in our
statistics.
Yeah, so you can imagine how difficult it is working under these kind of
conditions that I've just described for a person to find a way out, to
reach out and to get help.
So we recognize that this bill is a major step forward for New
Zealand, which is lagging behind other nations in legislation
for preventing and addressing modern slavery.
And we commend the cross-party cooperation which
helped to bring this bill before Parliament, and we acknowledge the
people and the civil society organizations whose hard mahi
over many years has led to this moment where we now have legislation
before the House. But we believe the bill needs to go
further. We need to go further as a nation if we're to stop
the modern slavery that's happening here in Aotearoa, and if we're to
provide victim survivors on our shores with the support
they need to move out of these vulnerable situations and to be able to
recover and not experience further harm.
So our recommendations are for
removing the business income threshold from the bill.
As you will have noted in our written submission,
many of our clients who are being subjected to modern slavery
conditions are employed by businesses whose incomes do not
meet the threshold. In fact, many of these businesses would come nowhere
near it. And we think that it would seem
incongruous to have a situation where most, if not all
of the businesses who are actually engaging in modern slavery practices here in
Aotearoa do not come under the ambit of New Zealand's modern
slavery legislation.
We point to another measure, which is for New Zealand to
discontinue the bonding of people on temporary work visas to their
employers.
These visas and the extreme power imbalance in the employer's
favor that they establish have created conditions
favorable to modern slavery in our country, and they're
enabling the problem to persist. Ending tied
visas is an essential part of tackling the modern
slavery that's happening here in New Zealand.
The issue of tied visas may be considered outside the scope of this
bill, but we believe it's highly relevant to its
purpose and intent, and we're asking the members of this committee
to advocate to the Minister for Immigration to untie visas from
employers.
Additionally, we recommend that the bill should not
just require businesses to report on incidents of
modern slavery within their operations and supply chains.
If this bill is to be more than a tick box exercise, if it's
to be a driver of meaningful change, it must,
excuse me, also require businesses to act when
they identify potential or actual modern
slavery within their operations and supply chains.
And we note that Australia's modern slavery legislation, while it
doesn't yet mandate action, that this change is
being signaled. And if we don't reflect this
shift in our own legislation when we have this
opportunity, then New Zealand will continue to lag
behind on the international stage when it comes to acting against modern
slavery. One thing we really want to highlight as
well is that the bill must make provisions for
support for victim survivors in New Zealand.
This is an issue our CABs around the country are particularly
concerned about and where they see an urgent need for
change. Our CABs are witnessing the
harm for victim survivors caused by a lack of
support for income, accommodation, healthcare, and
legal assistance. People are often having to
return to situations of harm, either back to the business that
exploited them or they have to leave the country.
And leaving the country can mean returning to a situation that is made
more precarious or unsafe as a result of how things
unfolded for them here in New Zealand.
Supports for victim survivors should be included in the bill
now. Delaying this provision until the three-year
review will mean that people are continuing to be trapped
in harmful situations because they don't have the means to
survive outside of them.
And finally,
we recommend that the bill establishes the role of a
dedicated, independent, anti-slavery commissioner to
identify risks, monitor implementation, provide
practical guidance and support to help victim survivors move out of
situations of harm, and help businesses meet
expectations and standards for preventing and addressing
exploitation.
The role of an independent commissioner, we believe, is essential for
ensuring that monitoring and enforcement is
applied consistently across government and the private sector, and that the
intent of the bill is achieved.
So in conclusion, we welcome this bill as an
important step forward for Aotearoa in eliminating modern
slavery. But for it to be effective in
practice, it must go beyond reporting
alone.
Of course.
It must require businesses to take action, and it must also
respond to the realities of people who are experiencing
serious exploitation and modern slavery conditions here in this
country.
Thank you, Louise. Thank you, Gwyneth. Appreciate your submissions.
Thank you.
Okay.
All right, colleagues, next submitter is Maria
Tavulaki. Maria, I see you're with us.
Are you able to turn your camera on so we can see
you?Hi,
Maria. Welcome to the subcommittee.
You've got five minutes, and we'd love to have a minute or so to ask questions
within that.
You're on mute.
Yeah. There we go.
Welcome.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can hear you.
Okay. So thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Maria Tavu'ilaki, and I'm an LLB Honors
student,
as well as being the first Samoan-UN Indigenous Fellow.
I support the Modern Slavery Bill, in particular,
its recognition that modern slavery is not
always about physical force.
Sometimes it's coercion through dependency and a lack
of real alternatives.
My
submission is based on my LLB Honors research, which
is in the Recognized Seasonal Employer scheme,
or the RSE scheme,
and the experiences of temporary migrant workers.
And my first point that I wanted to bring across
is that the temporary migrant workers should be recognized as a
particularly vulnerable group
under this bill, where the workers may depend on a
single employer,
and not only for their job but also for their accommodation,
transportation access, healthcare access,
immigration status, banking access,
and also future opportunities to
return to New Zealand as well as their pastoral care.
So when all of these things are connected, the workers, they may
feel unable to raise concerns, or leave the
conditions, or even report exploitation,
and even if they are technically free to do so.
And I guess one of the things that I had to sit with is that
the worst thing about what's worse than being exploited
is not being exploited.
So when all of these
things are connected, it makes it very
difficult for somebody that
English is their second language and not being able to
talk about the exploitation conditions that they're under.
So my second point is also that these
concerns, they're not really theoretical.
They actually are happening. And recent
accommodation inspections, which I had gotten under the Official
Information Act,
found issues still in existence. Issues such as
overcrowding, inadequate facilities, mold, unhealthy
conditions,
being forced to work even if they're sick.
Yeah, some of their living conditions in the RSE worker accommodation.
My final point is that New Zealand has not
ratified or even signed the United Nation Migrant Workers Convention.
That is not even a mention in the bill,
which that's the main international treaty that's
dedicated to protecting migrant workers.
And I think this is important because it recognizes that migrant
workers can face
particular vulnerabilities arising from employer dependency,
restricted labor mobility, unequal bargaining power, et
cetera. And if we're going to have
a Modern Slavery Bill, I just think it's really
important that it reflects
those realities and provides strong protections for migrant workers,
including
those participating in the migrant scheme.
And I really feel that it's not just--
I think there was a report that I read and some of the
employers had said something like it's just a few
bad sort of pickings in the apple or whatever,
but I feel like it's the structural system.
The system itself needs to
be changed.
But yeah, that's kind of the points that I wanted to
highlight, and I'm so sorry I had to run up the stairs.
I just finished my very last exam.
So yeah, I didn't really have time to--
I can't really hear you, sorry. Hang on.
Sorry, that's my fault. Thank you, Maria. That's good.
I think we have time for one question,
colleagues.
Do you think?
Yeah, I mean, I'm always keen to ask. I just don't want to dominate the thing.
That's all right. No, go for it, dude.
Congratulations on completing your LLB. That's fantastic.
Thank you.
I'd love to dive deeper into the work that you've done around the RSE,
and if that's possible, post this and offline if we could
speak further in some way, that would be really, really helpful.
The thing which I'm wrestling with is I wonder whether what you're
raising is an issue that as
government, we need to deal with in its own
right as opposed to including it in this bill, which
is primarily about
reporting.
Because the issues that you're raising are going to
take
quite detailed responses
that don't seem to immediately fit within the scope of this bill as it's currently
imagined. Your thoughts on that?
Well, I kind of thought that. I did
think about that in terms of the reporting of it,
but
I felt that perhaps if it was mentioned in it, it can move towards the
right direction-Of discussing as a start, I
guess, or discussing about the
situation. But I'm more than happy to talk
of,
post this,
of any questions. But yeah. It's a
definitely
severe situation, I think.
Yes.
And it's one that I will table at the UN in
terms of-
Yeah
... because it is modern slavery in the sense
where,
as mentioned by CAB that
it's restricted, like they can't go anywhere. They can't.
It just needs-
Okay
... simply change. Yeah.
Maria, thank you for appearing. Thank you for your submission.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
And now colleagues, we're going to move on to the Responsible
Investment Association of Australasia, and we have Dean Hegarty with
us. Welcome, Dean.
Welcome to our subcommittee. Dean, you've got
10 minutes, and we'd like to be able to ask some questions within that
time.
Wonderful. Thank you very much. Kia ora koutou.
Thank you both for the opportunity
to present to you today, but also more broadly in the submission process.
And especially just wanted to start out by highlighting those on the committee who
have been involved in getting us to this point in the legislative
process. And ko Dean Hegarty toku ingoa.
I'm the co-CEO of RIAA. We are the
industry body for responsible investment.
We represent a member base with over $80 trillion in
assets globally, and that reflects most of the asset managers and
super funds over in Australia as well as in New Zealand.
So about 92% of the KiwiSaver market, as well as all the major
private wealth providers, and so the overwhelming majority of funds that are being
managed professionally on behalf of Kiwis as well as the New Zealand government.
You would've read our submissions and a couple of things I'd particularly like to
highlight. A lot of what you would've read in those submissions and
what I know you'll hear today, it sort of highlights the moral and ethical and
humanitarian reasons why this legislation is essential for us as a
country.
This is the right thing for us to do, and we all have a responsibility to do it.
The point from our submission that I really want to highlight today is that this is
also the smart thing for us to be doing.
And that's because modern slavery and our current lack
of legislation in particular present a real material and
financial risk to New Zealand companies, to New Zealand investors, and
by extension, all New Zealanders who are involved through those organizations.
And the proof of that can be seen in the joint statement
that RIAA coordinated with both institutional investors, but also New Zealand
businesses who showed their support for these laws.
As of today, we've got 32 signatories to our joint statement.
They account for New Zealand dollars $324 billion
worth. And that number continues to grow as more
organizations prioritize this as risk.
So, three things that I, in particular, kind of want to draw on in that.
I think the first is why this bill really matters to institutional
investors.
Investors are exposed to modern slavery risks
through a whole host of ways, but in particular through investee companies that
come in across
a really diversified range of portfolios.
And poor management of these risks can affect resilience,
reputation, legal exposure, all of which leads to
long-term return risk. This legislation will improve the quality and
consistency and the usefulness of information that
investors need to be able to effectively assess modern slavery risk,
and that matters to anybody who has money invested through New
Zealand companies.
The second is the efficiency and effectiveness piece.
I think it's often sort of mislabeled as additional red tape
or people talk about the reporting function.
The reality is that this bill complements our broader economic
priorities. It's consistent with the current budget focus on a more resilient
economy, stronger market settings that support investor confidence,
and improved transparency.
And then the third piece I really wanted to talk to is the reputational piece,
because this bill does take a really crucial step towards
bringing New Zealand closer to alignment with global
regulations, market expectations in those markets,
of which many are our really significant trading partners.
So, a lot of them have legislated frameworks.
This brings us into line with Australian requirements under the Modern Slavery
Act. And having this framework, it's only going to become
more necessary as global developments to address modern slavery continues
to evolve. So, you've already heard the Australian commissioner earlier
mention the impending strengthening of the legislation in the EU.
We've all seen the developments around the
US tariffs.
The reality is, and I know that there've been comments from the trade
minister around the fact that this doesn't happen in New Zealand.
The reality is, without effective consistent reporting,
we cannot reliably make that statement, right?
We are an export nation, and the products that we are exporting
are in industries like agriculture that carry
really significant risk in this space.
We cannot afford to be behind the rest of the world when
it comes to legislation in areas like modern slavery.
So, I'm conscious that I'm at five minutes.
There's more I can kind of speak to, but I might just pause there and see if
there's any questions from the committee.
Sure. Thanks, Dean. Colleagues, any questions?
Go for it, Greg.
Thanks very much. Kia ora Dean, thank you very much for that,
mate.We've had some
pretty solid pushback, including from a couple of people who know the
area very well. You might have
come across a guy called Ralph Simpson, who was a partner at Bell Gully, and
then actually spent five years fighting modern
slavery in Thailand and then came back and worked
for one of New Zealand's largest corporates in this area.
And he
is fully supportive of the legislation as it currently is,
but warned us strongly against going
down the due diligence route,
saying that it would add
really unhelpful complexity to
reporting companies without bearing any fruit
internationally. So a lot of your emphasis has been around why, in
terms of operating within a global economy, New Zealand needs to take this.
Would you
critique that view, if you could, in terms of staying with our current
framework within the proposed legislation versus adding in DD?
Yeah, I think what is absolutely critical is that there need to
be accountability measures in place,
and a lot of that, I think we can take and learn from what's happened within the
Australian context. I think what that due diligence needs to look like,
we don't have a firm view either way, but I think there's
absolutely got to be core accountability built
in,
otherwise it's not going to have the impact that we're all hoping for.
Okay.
So you're looking for more than
New Zealand doing its piece. You're wanting us to really push the line out on
this one.
Yeah, and I think the three-year review that you've got
that comes as a part of the bill, I think is really important.
There's a lot that can come next, and I think absolutely
all of us would agree that this is not a final destination and that there won't be
any landing points of this. It's going to evolve as global expectations and global
developments evolve. I think that three-year review is really critical.
The other, I guess, piece to come in with that is really clear
guidance on stuff like this is absolutely critical.
And so if you're an investor, you're in all likelihood using
the kind of reporting that's going to come out of these, but also may very well be
doing the reporting yourself. And so having really clear and effective guidance
on the back of any legislation is also really important.
Mm-hmm. Kia ora.
Lawrence.
Kia ora. Thanks. Thanks, Chair.
Kia ora, Dean. Thank you so much for your submission.
I've got sort of two questions. One of them is sort of following on from
what you mentioned in terms of the changing,
I guess, trajectory of where we're looking at in terms of investment globally and
being more ethical and more sustainable.
What do you think would be the potential
risk, but also from an investment perspective
when communities are changing their perception
of modern slavery and of
ethical investment or sustainable investment in general?
Do you see that if Aotearoa doesn't quite catch up to that,
that it'll actually put our investment
at risk, and is that something that is able to be even quantified?
Being my first question.
Yeah, so what can absolutely be quantified is that the
appetite from consumers and investors for this type of
investing and to take a more responsible approach to how they are
investing is growing both in New Zealand,
Australia, and around the globe. I think the other reality when it comes to
something like modern slavery is that it comes hand in hand with something else
that's growing really significantly at the moment, which is geopolitical
uncertainty.
Mm-hmm.
And so as that geopolitical uncertainty rises
around the world, modern slavery risk grows alongside it, and as a consequence of
that, the potential downsides of outcomes and the risks of not being
across those continue to grow hand in hand.
And that's why you're seeing core areas like the
EU strengthening and signaling much
stronger implementation of this kind of legislation because it's a big
issue today. It's only going to become a bigger issue that costs us more in the
future.
And-
I'm going to cut you off there, Lawrence.
Sorry.
We've run out of time. Sorry.
Okay. Thank you.
Dean, thank you very much for your submission and your comments. Excellent.
Kia ora. Good luck, everyone.
Thank you. Great.
All right, colleagues, we are now joined by Paul Barber, who
is very familiar to the Select Committee system. Welcome, Paul.
Yeah.
You've got 10 minutes, and we'd love to ask you questions.
Great. Well, thank you very much.
Yes, today I'm presenting on behalf of The Salvation Army Social Policy Unit, and
you've got our written submission in front of you.
And first off, I want to simply emphasize that we strongly support this
bill, and we're grateful for Parliament for the wide support shown for it in the
first reading, and we look forward to it becoming law.
And I guess our submission that we've got in front of you just makes three key
points, that
we
support the push for a stronger requirement to be put on
entities to undertake due diligence and demonstrating they're
taking action to deal with the risks of modern slavery.
Secondly, we really want to see
that there is a government agency connected to our
Anti-Slavery Commissioner that's dedicated to help
identify high receptors and also help organizations to respond
to identified risks. And I guess the third key point for us
and our organization and our work,
is the experience of survivors need to be at the center of all our thinking around
this legislation,
and the other legislation that affects them and how these things work
together.We really need this to be part of a joined up
approach
through a properly established and resourced national referral
mechanism,
that includes referrals to support for survivors.
Combating modern slavery and human trafficking is a global struggle, and the
Asia-Pacific region faces widespread challenges.
Our submission and our work in Aotearoa, New Zealand, is informed by
the international work of The Salvation Army that's present in more than
130 countries worldwide.
And worldwide, The Salvation Army is working hard to coordinate within our
territories,
an international response to survivors of modern slavery and trafficking,
because these issues go across borders and regions.
In our submissions we note that during 2025 in the Southeast
Asia and Pacific region,
Salvation Army organizations around the
region have supported more than 1,000 identified survivors of
trafficking and slavery, as well as about another 10,000 who are considered
vulnerable to modern slavery and human trafficking.
So I want to thank you on behalf of the survivors, most of whom we cannot speak for
themselves, for getting this far.
And let's get the job done in helping to
protect and help.
Also, The Salvation Army here in Aotearoa, New Zealand, is already working,
and we know that this kind of legislation is a beacon of
hope for people we're working with.
It's a sign that politicians and business people really care about the people
around the world who produce the goods and services that are bought and sold in
this country. In our submission, we draw attention to what's
being done in Australia. The Salvation Army in Australia has been part of the
modern slavery legislation over there since 2018.
And we've got a link in there to what the Salvation Army in Australia has
been reporting. And one of the things that shows is simply having
even the requirements as they are in Australia at the moment, requiring people to
support on their supply chains has increased that need for
forms of diligence and examination of their supply chains.
I guess, this bill we see as essential as part of the many things we
need to do in our country to eradicate the scourge of slavery.
Look at international reputations at stake.
It's been mentioned in previous submissions there.
And businesses need to better understand the extent of that reputational risk
that exists in their supply chains, and they need help from a specialized
government agency to do that consistently and well.
And as I mentioned,
here in Aotearoa, New Zealand, we've been working at The Salvation Army,
to build a coordinated national response, train up people in our
communities
to be able to identify and respond to signs of trafficking and slavery.
Our capacity to respond to this is still really limited.
But there's been progress and we're learning
that on the ground in this country, we get
glimpses into the painful experiences and trauma of slavery that exists here
on our shores,
and its international connections.
And our experience is that many survivors live in fear and despair.
And even if they find an opportunity and courage to try and escape,
the journey can be difficult and consuming.
So
we're really pleading here as part of our
submission to support this legislation.
We need a functioning, effective national referral mechanism
to provide the processes that enable identifying victims of modern
slavery and human trafficking, and importantly, referring them to protection and
support.
The support work we do is practical stuff, such as organizing identification,
accommodation, food, basic necessities, transport, overcoming language
barriers. But most importantly, it's about building relationships of trust
that help deal with the trauma and exploitation that people have experienced.
So,
we need this joined up approach, and this modern slavery and human trafficking,
and this bill is part of that. It's a central part of the combined actions because
it means taking action to actively look for signs of slavery,
and we would like to see that integrated with
effective survivor support and meaningful enforcement of domestic law
and international obligations. And I will stop there.
Thanks, Paul.
Greg's got a question.
Yeah. Kia ora, Paul. Thank you so much for your work on this over so many years,
mate. Per our conversations a few months ago,
obviously, you've identified all the four parts of
tackling modern slavery. The first part in terms of prosecution, which has been
dealt with in the Crimes Act that are processing through Parliament at the moment.
And then you touch on the establishment of a commissioner, which as you
have seen, the bill is very much intending to do that, but through the Human
Rights Commission. And then that leaves those other two parts, which is what
the bill as it's currently drafted is attending to, which is modern slavery
reporting, and then the part, the area that you're already
encouraging us to
significantly expand and incorporate into this, which is
dealing with domestic victims.
What I'm wrestling with is, is this bill the best
place to do that last piece of work?
And this is where I'm keen to get your thoughts on it, particularly given that
towards the end of the third page on your written report you said,
so under subpart three, Clause 22, survivor support, you say The Salvation Army has
recently begun receiving funding to provide assistance and support.
Could you speak to what's already happening in that space and your thoughts
around
whether that could continue to be expanded rather than that needing to be
incorporated into the legislation that we're discussing?
Look, I think there's two things. Yeah, certainly,
whether it sits well in this piece of legislation,
I think is a bit of an open question, but it's a bit like some of the other areas.
I mean theThe clauses there about
government reporting
put an extensive requirement on the government to report, and
reporting on not doing very much doesn't sound like a good thing to be
doing. So perhaps it may be
acceptable to simply have the requirement to report,
but we would like the select committee to consider whether you can strengthen that
to
requirement to act similarly around the due diligence type of approach that-
Yeah
... it's not good enough just to report on not doing very much.
Yeah.
And if I want to speak briefly about what is happening currently,
I guess that would be also a comment.
We're doing our best to put together something under
laws and regulations that struggle to provide a
coherent response to people who are experiencing this, and
that puts those people at risk.
Mm.
Delays in even being recognized
in that situation,
delays in processing visas, simply people slipping through cracks
because timing wasn't right.
And then
the ability of organizations like ourselves to provide some
practical responses, particularly when it comes to the
state stepping in to provide
DUETs, but to provide social assistance. All those things need more work.
But the experiencing we're gathering through this work is
we can make a difference, and if we can coordinate,
it's effective, but it
just needs to be a greater focus. And you can imagine if
we put a higher requirement on people to identify modern slavery, we
must expect that there'll be more reporting, and we need to respond to that well.
Mm.
I don't know if that answers your question.
Yeah. No, thank you. Thank you, Paul, very much.
Thanks, Paul. Very informative, very useful. Thank you.
Thank you.
That's great.
Okay, colleagues, we now have
Dennis Parker.
Yes.
Hello, Dennis. Welcome to the subcommittee.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Dennis, you've got five minutes, and we'd love to be able to have a minute or so to
ask questions within that.
Okay. I'm presenting alongside Dr. Caroline Ansley, who should be there as well.
Okay.
And we are co-leaders of the Cult Informed Professional Network.
So I appear today before you wearing two hats, one
concerning international modern slavery as the chief executive of Trader
Importers.
I gave a submission this morning along with Daniel Fielding and Brittany
Halligan.
But I'm also
in my other role,
we want to talk about modern slavery, which is happening here in
Aotearoa, New Zealand. And
we think that it's important that there is a submission that
takes a strong stance on what is happening here in
here. So I'm going to pass across to Caroline Ansley.
Hi. I'm just clarifying that I could be seen and heard.
We cannot see you, Caroline.
Oh.
Your camera is switched off.
Oh, I have switched it on. Sorry, new computer today.
I didn't know if the camera would work, but I'm glad you can hear me.
Okay.
My name's Dr. Caroline Ansley. I wanted to talk
about how New Zealand does in fact have documented
cases of trafficking and labor exploitation within our own borders.
The Modern Slavery Bill should not only look outwards, but it
should look inwards. Domestic victims need to be visible in the data
and in the law. The Cult Informed Professional Network has submitted
already that the bill be amended to require assessment and public
reporting on the nature and the scale of modern slavery occurring within New
Zealand itself. That's a measured, achievable addition.
Without it, we are legislating in the dark about our own communities.
But there is a form of modern slavery this bill does not yet see at all.
Beyond trafficking, there are people in New Zealand living inside closed,
high-control environments where coercion operates through psychological
pressure, spiritual fear, social isolation, rather than
physical restraint. The Employment Court findings in the
Gloryvale, Courage, and Pilgrim cases documented conditions at
Gloryvale which approach servitude, including child labor and a degree of control
that removed genuine freedom. Police investigations into slavery and
servitude allegations there have been running for years and appear stalled.
But Gloryvale is the most visible example, but it's not the only
one. We estimate there are around 50,000 people in coercive control
environments across New Zealand's group centers, many of them experiencing
conditions that fall squarely within the modern slavery framework.
Here are three examples. There's a church community called the
2by2s or The Truth or the Church with No Name.
This is a fairly cloistered and closed community across New Zealand.
Despite working full-time for the church, potentially for years, the ministers of
this church work for no pay. They travel around homes in their communities
ministering with no say in the work they do or where they sleep at night.
Should they leave, they depart with nothing.
Survivors of this group describe it as highly coercive.
Another group called the Sri Chinmoy Center
in Christchurch has a restaurant called The Lotus Heart.
The survivors of this coercive group have described working for
extremely low pay and having to have unpaid mandatory
or voluntary shifts required as part of their commitment to the group.
People in this group have reported being pressured to quit their studies, other
employment, and isolate themselves from family and friends in order to continue
connection with the group. And right now, a trial is currently
underway in the Auckland High Court, which examines a small, highly coercive
cult-like group in Orewa.
In that case, four people are being tried for kidnapping and the manslaughter of a
70-year-old Chinese woman called Chih-Li Wang.
These four people are the cult leader of this small sect and three of his
family members. The court is hearing of the slavery-like conditions that Wang, the
woman who was killed, lived in before her death, and the servitude she
and her fellow followers were subject to, along with being starved, held
captive, and physically abused.A corporate reporting
regime of a 100 million threshold does not reach these situations.
It was not designed to. But that means this bill, as currently drafted, would have
no meaningful difference to the people in our support networks.
Back to Dennis.
Thank you. And
we appreciate that the bill has got a specific
aim in mind, and that we're wanting to have this extended.
And what we would like to do is
ask as the committee to
widen their thinking as regards what's possible,
both now and in the future. And we've got three things we'd like to have
consideration for. That the bill explicitly requires assessment and
public reporting on the nature and scale of modern slavery occurring
within New Zealand itself, and that this domestic reporting obligation
recognize slavery and servitude can arise through psychological
and relation coercion, not only
physical force.
Secondly, that specialist oversight be established with the mandate to coordinate
across the agencies that currently have no single body responsible for these
cases. And thirdly, that meaningful investment
can be made into support survivors because the barriers
people face leaving coercive environments, financial education,
psychological and practical, persist long after they physically
leave. For the people we support, freedom can come through
trusted relationships, skilled professionals, and long, hard legal
battles. The bill can do better. We urge you to build a framework that
reaches people before it gets to that point.
And thank you.
Okay. Thanks very much for your submission.
We've used all the available time.
Okay, we are now going to hear from
Simpson Grierson.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Hello.
My name is Bronwyn Howe. I'm a partner in the Simpson Grierson employment law team,
and I'm joined by Anastasia Gambell, a partner in our corporate team.
We very much welcome the opportunity and the introduction of the Modern Slavery
Bill and the opportunity to address you.
We just wanted to start by commending MPs Greg Fleming, Greg, I can see you're
here, and Camilla Belich, and jointly sponsoring this bill.
It's nice to see some bipartisanship in action.
We had been a bit surprised that modern slavery wasn't seen as a
priority.
We are very supportive of this bill.
We understand that New Zealand currently lacks modern slavery supply chain
legislation. Although slavery and forced labor are illegal under our existing
laws, this still needs to be addressed.
I think we can all agree that no one wants modern slavery in New Zealand, and
modern slavery is very deserving of our protection, and New Zealand has
been lagging behind. The way we approached our submission on the bill
wasn't to go clause by clause. We very much approached it trying to focus on
a number of discrete areas. We had only four recommendations where we think
targeted refinement and clarification would materially
improve the workability of the bill in an orderly transition
without undermining the policy intent of the bill.
So we're very much trying to be constructive
and practical from a sort of workability perspective, particularly from where some
of our clients might be approaching it.
So I'm going to address the first three recommendations, and Anastasia will address
the second two. And it may be that we don't take up our full 10
minutes because our comments are quite targeted.
The first thing is we are really recommending the bill needs to be consistent with
international standards, and our sort of international colleagues and
trading partners, such as the Australian Modern Slavery Act, and then
similar laws that the UK and Canada have.
And that's really to make sure we've got a robust framework, but one that's also
internationally consistent. We don't want New Zealand to be an
outlier or have modern slavery legislation that's different
to similar jurisdictions.
And we think aligning New Zealand with similar jurisdictions brings obvious
benefits,
credibility to our regime, because we wouldn't be an outlier
compared to well-established regimes
overseas. It would also enable those entities that operate
internationally to align their requirements with similar
jurisdictions, and therefore, it would be much more seamless.
New Zealand and Australia already share a highly integrated supply chain, and we've
got a number of shared corporate groups, and there are already those existing
comprehensive requirements under the Australian regime, and many of our
clients and many New Zealand businesses already comply with the Australian
reporting requirements. So we think divergence could create
unnecessary additional burdens.
And then finally, it just enables better comparability of disclosure
statements and more consistency.
The second recommendation is in relation to allowing New Zealand-based
entities to group report,
if one of their overseas controlling companies is also required to
report. Again, simplifies the process
because as the bill currently stands, if you meet the threshold of having to
report, it also requires potentially a parent company to report
on the same materials. So we just say that that is a more
sensible regime that reflects the operational realities of entities
carrying out business in New Zealand and have noted
in our submission that that was the original intention behind the bill's
predecessor.
And then group reporting is provided for comparable jurisdictions
such as Australia and Canada,
and it,
we say, is more sensible in an environment where supply chains, processes, and risk
matrixes and more are decided at the higher level group
governance setting and not necessarily at the local branch
setting. And now I think Anastasia's going to talk to our second two
recommendations.
Thank you, Bronwyn. So as Bronwyn mentioned, I'll focus my
remarks on two aspects of the bill, and these are the more practical
aspects. The first one is the director and officer liability
for reporting errors, and the second one is the need for clear
transitional arrangements.
On the director and officer liability, our recommendation is that liability
should be directed at knowingly false or
materially misleading statements rather than mistakes such as
clerical or administrative errors in reporting.
So under clauses 16 and 17 of the bill, directors and
other persons involved in the management of a reporting entity may face personal
liability, and obviously this is very significant for all of the
businesses that will be caught by this regime, including a lot of our clients.
We agree that where an entity produces a false statement,
that should be treated seriously, but the difficulty arises where the
concept of a misleading statement is not clear
and it is open to interpretation. And where it's not an
issue of dishonesty or concealment, but a pure mistake,
then
it becomes very disproportionate.
And of course, we're talking about very complex and data-driven reports as well, so
chances of an error are even higher.
By way of an example, a report might use a trading name, for
example, rather than a legal name.
And although that obviously is an inadvertent and quite
a simple mistake to make,
as the bill is drafted right now, that would be caught by the regime.
And of course,
we don't think it should.
In our view,
the policy objective is to address the worst forms of
exploitation, and the law should distinguish clearly between deliberate
wrongdoing and genuine reporting mistakes.
And we therefore recommend either narrowing liability so that it
attaches to knowingly false or materially misleading
statements, or instead introducing a safe harbor
or a remediation mechanism, and that would allow an entity to
clarify and correct an error before any liability attaches.
And we know that the Australian model provides for
such regime, which could be a useful comparison.
To us, that shows
a more practical and proportionate approach.
On the second point, I want to address
the transitional arrangements. Our recommendation on
the bill is that we should be very clear about when it
comes into effect and have a phased implementation.
There should be adequate lead-in period
before the first reporting deadline so that businesses that are
affected by this can actually properly prepare and of course collate the
necessary data for them to be able to comply with the regime.
At present, the bill does not include an express transitional section or
schedule. That creates uncertainty, and
for reporting entities that could be caught by this, this is
going to be a significant difficulty.
So ideally,
we should have a very clear
starting point when the reporting regime would actually start,
when the bill would come into force, etcetera.
It should also take into account sufficient time to
make the system changes, train staff, adjust governance
settings, engage with supply chains, and develop processes
that would produce reliable reporting.
And if transition is too compressed, then there is a risk of rushed
or poor quality compliance, and that would not advance the policy
objectives of the bill. Clear transitional arrangements would support
better implementation and in turn, better reporting outcomes.
So in closing, as Bronwyn mentioned, we support the bill's overall
intent and its role in strengthening the response to modern slavery.
Our recommendations are aimed at ensuring the framework is practical,
internationally aligned, and focuses on the right
substance over form. Thank you for the opportunity to present our submissions,
and we would welcome any opportunity to assist you further
and
working through any practical implications of these reforms. Thank you.
Thank you, both of you. It's really great to get very practical
and specific recommendations to
make the legislation more workable.
Colleagues, any questions?
Great.
Yeah. Hey, Anastasia, just when you were talking about the lead
time, would that extend then to
when a company hits the $100 million threshold,
that it then, rather than reporting in that year, it then
has the next year to prepare for reporting?
Just following the logic of the arguments you were arguing for just then in
terms of the implementation of the timing of the start of the legislation.
Yeah, that would probably make sense.
So in particular, whether the reporting is aligned to the
financial year of the particular company or whether there's a
fixed reporting timeframe for all entities, then if
an entity is on the verge of
reaching that deadline, sorry, that threshold, but is not sure, it
would be very complex for it to be covered by it straight away.
Mm-hmm.
So perhaps there should be a lead-in time for entities that are
on the verge as well.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Right. Thank you, both of you. Appreciate your submissions.
Thank you. Good afternoon.
Thank you.
Right, colleagues, we've now got the Maritime Union joining us,
and we have
Clint Smith
and Carl Findlay.
And
is Rob Egan joining us?
He should be. Sorry.
That's all right. We'll give him a moment.
He is not on the call yet, Mr. Chair.
He's not. Okay. Let's crack into it. Hi, Carl. Hi, Clint.
Welcome to the subcommittee on the Modern Slavery Bill.The
floor is yours. You've got 10 minutes, and we'd love to have some of that time
to put questions to you.
Sure.
Carl, you're muted.
You're on mute, Carl.
How's that?
Works perfectly.
Well, thank you very much for having us.
It's actually, really appreciate the time.
It's obviously something dear to our heart,
this,
but if you don't mind, I'll hand it over to the brains of the operation, Clint, to
say a few words to get us kicked off.
Very good.
If you don't mind. Thank you.
Thank you, Carl.
So MUNZ strongly supports the intent of
the Modern Slavery Bill, and
we really see it as an opportunity to
reveal some of the
unwholesome practices that are happening on
international ships that
serve New Zealand.
Right now,
as the bill is drafted, our view is that
it would not sufficiently reveal
what is happening on those ships where we know crews have been
exploited.
And it
would be unnecessarily burdensome on Kiwi companies
to be expected to find that out for themselves.
You'll see in the submission that we put in that
exploitation of workers on the seas is a
huge issue globally-
Mm
... and it does occur in New Zealand waters
as well. Even the international minimums,
which
foreign crews are working on in New Zealand waters, is only
700 US a month. Right now, the crew of the Vega
that have been stuck
off Tasman for months are being paid that and
held there. When
authorities have looked at this,
issues with underpaying and lack of employment
conditions on crews in New Zealand ports
on international ships has been widely found.
So,
what we would say is two amendments.
One is requiring those international vessels that are serving New Zealand to
reveal how they are paying their crew,
and we've got some suggestions there for the
details that would need to be broken out.
And then
require New Zealand companies to say which vessels
have been used in their supply chain.
So it doesn't require New Zealand companies to
work out for themselves what those people in their supply chain have been paid for.
That's going to be revealed by the international shipping lines as a requirement of
serving in New Zealand waters, and
then they just have to say which vessels they've been using.
And we think that would really help with the transparency around what's
happening to these crews who
are working in conditions that New Zealanders
would be shocked by.
So, I don't know,
Carl, do you have anything more to add?
Yeah, I just think it's absolutely invaluable, this bill.
And as Clint pointed out, it puts the onus on the
people trading on our coast to actually come up with some answers
for us that
will help us close the gap
and investigate a bit further. We know anecdotally through the ITF, the
International Transport Federation...
Well, actually no, it's not even some of the stuff is anecdotal.
The
wage recovery and ships getting arrested are a common
occurrence
in our industry,
and I believe there's one that's just been arrested recently due to
a wage
issue.
So, any helpful support we can get in that direction
would be fantastic, and those amendments would really help, and as Clint pointed
out, put the onus on
these people, bring them down here to own up and
be upfront with us. And
I'm pretty sure
99% of New Zealanders wouldn't be happy with what they're hearing,
some of the stuff that we know is going on, on their coast.
Mm.
So.
Very good. All right. You guys happy to take questions?
Absolutely.
Yeah. Well, let me start with one. So, is it your understanding
that under the bill as currently drafted,
the shipping companies, the big international shipping companies who
operate in the New Zealand
supply chain, they would be reporting entities,
and therefore they would have to report publicly
on the conditions on the ships
that they're
contracting?
They would, right?
Yeah. Well,
I think the bill probably needs to be explicit about that, and that's the
issue. These are foreign registered ships under foreign
flags, and they're coming in here for up to a month at a
time and leaving. And so
tracking down who
was leasing or chartering or owned that vessel at the time, who was responsible
for the crew,
could
be tricky. So if we had it explicit that as part of coming into New
Zealand ports, they had to reveal those
aspects, that would make that clear, I think.
Hmm.
Yeah, I think who you're talking about
there,
they'll actually be
pretty much the good guys in this scenario, if you like.
It's all the ones we'll capture behind them, the
smaller
coastal vessels that trade between the islands.
Hmm.
The
fishing vessels and the people that they're using and bringing
in, and coming down into our waters.
This is pretty untapped.
Yeah.
We know on a daily that there's a lot of this stuff going on.
And it's not going to be easy. We're not saying it's going to be easy or-
Hmm
...
this is a big project and it's going to upset a few people.
But-
Sure
... are we going to be for real or what?
Are we-
Yeah
... going to have an opportunity and do something?
Are we-
Hmm
... going to stand up for what the bill is actually saying?
Hmm.
Just
further to that, the Southeast Asian fishing industry is one of the most
notorious industries globally for modern
slavery,
and yet it's supplying quite a lot of seafood products that ends up in our
supermarkets.
Yes.
So Greg, is this
something you thought about with the bill?
No, I hadn't. So I just thought, first of all, thanks heaps guys for
raising the idea. I'm just thinking, to go back to Phil's opening question around
it, obviously if those companies are operating in New
Zealand, a great number of them are going to, by virtue of bringing
products here or taking them away, will be part of the supply
chain of New Zealand companies that will have to report.
I presume what you're targeting is those ones who
the companies that they're working with are under the threshold, and so then you're
wanting to be explicit. I guess,
the reasons that you present are compelling.
I'm
mindful of the fact that we could place too many
specific demands on this bill,
that we
render it no longer fit for purpose if we
just try and stretch it too far. And so, yeah,
obviously the committee will definitely suggest, give serious consideration to
your request. But I'm just wondering, are the cases that
you are identifying and that therefore wouldn't be covered, as we were
saying, by the large reporting entities, is that not more
in the domain of the labor inspectorate?
And
would New Zealand's response to this kind of exploitation
not be better met by better resourcing and enhancing the
powers of our labor inspectorate?
Well,
we're very happy with the regulator Maritime New Zealand, but the trouble is,
as you just pointed out, they're
losing another 30 jobs soon.
So a better resourced Maritime New Zealand
would be fantastic, but they're still going to need some laws and legislation to
help them deal with these global
shipping
operators and
the fishing operations and so forth.
And I understand what you're saying, I really do, mate, about
we do need to be concerned,
being an island nation that's allowed our coastal, our own
security vessel-wise,
shrink so drastically. We do need to be concerned.
So,
yeah, there does need to be a bit of work done on it.
Hmm.
I guess the point is that,
to this point, the country has chosen to turn a blind eye to labor
standards on vessels supplying the New
Zealand coastline, Greg. But if this bill
is going to deal with modern slavery and supply chains more
generally, it begs the question why we wouldn't apply the same sort of standards
and scrutiny to our own coastline.
Hmm.
That's
it, isn't it?
Yeah.
It's also worth noting that
foreign flagged ships aren't necessarily captured within New Zealand employment
law.
That's right. Yeah.
And so-
Right
... the labor and the jurisdiction of the labor inspector.
The other thing that should be noted is
a class which Clint touched on, which is the ITF agreements,
which are below New Zealand employment
levels in terms of the quality of the contracts, but would not be classified as
modern slavery. That the majority of the ships that are
run directly on the large container
lines that come into New Zealand are currently ITF.
That's largely because of the ITF's work in organizing that.
It's not a permanent arrangement. Those contracts are renegotiated.
This is about finding a way to capture the data
required to identify modern slavery in our supply chains where it
exists.
The labor inspectorate's a sort of separate entity to that.
And given, what is it, something like 99.9% of our
goods
travel by sea freight, imports, exports,
it represents quite a large
opaque area-
Hmm
... for New Zealand companies to report on.
And in the absence of obtaining that data, which it's very difficult to
do, again because-
Hmm
... it's jurisdiction. And it may be covered, so the bigger ones would be
covered under the
threshold. But again, having something that
really specifies and highlights that jurisdiction would be
incredibly valuable, not just in terms of understanding what's going on with the
boats, but in terms of the businesses that are trying to report on their own supply
chains.
Yeah.
Okay, guys. Thanks very much. That's a
fascinating additional element to this discussion.
So appreciate it.
Thank you.
See you.
All right, colleagues, next up is Civil
Contractors,
and we have Fraser May.
Hello, Fraser.
Great. Thanks, Phil.
Welcome to the subcommittee.
Fraser, you've got 10 minutes, and
it'd be great if you could leave at least a minute or two for questions within
that.
Excellent. Thanks, Phil. Tena koutou katoa, chair, and
members of the committee. I'm Fraser May, communications and advocacy manager for
Civil Contractors New Zealand. Thanks for letting us speak today.
I'm going to take our written submission as read, as usual, rather than repeat it,
but our position is straightforward.
CCNZ supports the intention
of the Modern Slavery Bill.
Slavery, worker exploitation are abhorrent, and we need to
cut it out of New Zealand operations and supply chains.
We also need to make sure that we're addressing the real issue.
So if there are criminal elements abusing the system, and we've heard some
cases of that at the expense of workers, we need to catch them, and we
need to be careful that we're proportionate when doing this, so that we're not
creating more cost to the businesses that do look after their workers and
enabling to be undercut by the other businesses that are not.
So, just a quick note on what our members do.
They build and maintain infrastructure New Zealand relies on, so it's roading,
water networks, utilities, energy, earthworks, and site development.
We've got a pretty considerable trades workforce that's involved in doing that.
Some of our members are large companies, so say your Downers or your Fulton Hogans,
they're 100 million plus, or
we've also got members that are small companies that might have an earthmoving
truck and
a digger, like a small family business.
So we've got a pretty broad interest in making sure this bill works
when it hits the ground.
Key point I want to emphasize today is that good businesses
are trying to do the right thing. They invest in their people, they invest in
training and good employment and health and safety practices and
certifications.
They can be undercut by businesses that aren't following those rules
and the point there is just because we say we're doing something doesn't mean we
are doing something. So I'd ask you to take that into account with
this civil legislation.
When you're looking at a large supply chain, and
also government infrastructure procurement,
it gets pretty complex. And yeah, we support some action,
but
I think we really need to be cautious about creating too much more paperwork for
the good players, because this will be a cost to them bearing that.
And so just the question we'd ask is whether the
reporting only model risks being a bit too much compliance cost while not
enough teeth to prevent criminal conduct.
If we want to change behavior,
looking at procurement and how that bids in is going to be really important.
And also proportionality matters, so if we leave
this at $100 million plus, it's still going to have flow on effects all the way
through the supply chain. And so it should, this is an ecosystem thing, right?
So if we're looking at a large player, they'll be asking all their subcontractors
down the chain to report on this. So saying, "Yep, it's only an
obligation for 100 million plus companies," isn't quite true.
They're the ones that will be reporting on it, but everyone will bear that cost,
and that could be through certification schemes like Toitū or it could
be through ISO certification perhaps.
Yeah, so there are ways that it can work and we should be aware of those
when we're asking.
The small to medium contractors might also not be aware of the reasoning,
so yeah, just
worth considering
those implications that SMEs don't have the same systems, staff, or
bargaining power to monitor and risk can quite easily be
pushed down that supply chain.
Bringing that back to the top level, I guess, and who is really well equipped to
report on this. Councils, Crown entities, departments,
and some public sector clients are probably
quite well placed to understand and report on modern slavery risks in their own
operations and supply chain. But if we're applying a $100 million threshold, I
think there's 43 councils in New Zealand that don't meet that reporting threshold
of 100 million plus. And if you're looking at water entities coming in as well,
most of them won't meet that 100 million plus
threshold as well.
You may have already thought through that, but it's something I thought I'd raise
as to workability, because if we've got 43 councils that aren't obliged
to follow the rules and then
100 million
plus companies that are, that's a bit of a strange balance.
So just ask the committee to consider what that's reasonable.
I probably don't have the answer on that one, but
yeah, just looking at that kind of whole ecosystem there.
In the infrastructure space, it's procurement that shapes
behavior from clients. And
if they're excluded from reporting, the risk may remain hidden,
and that risk needs to be shared across client organizations when it comes to
infrastructure as well.
So look, just coming back to a few more points.
At its heart, I think, the bill shouldn't really be about another tick
box for reporting's sake.
It's about shared responsibility to make sure that we're getting good outcomes, and
good working relationships between businesses and workers, and not
enabling,
say,
someone that's not prepared to meet good standards and looking after their workers
to undercut those that are.
Certification can help.
We do have some frameworks already. Happy to have a chat about those.
And I guess in closing,
you've read the submission. CCNZ supports the intent of the bill,
but
the outcome we want is not more paper in the system.
It's a fairer, more transparent construction market where companies are doing the
right thing, criminal activity is tackled up front, and the companies that look
after their workers are encouraged to do so and not bear extra
cost of following the rules. So yeah, really happy to take any
questions. If you've got them, please ask away
Thanks, Fraser. Colleagues, any questions?
Greg
Yeah. Yeah, thanks very much, Fraser.
Hey, could you speak more to your carrot and stick and the kinds of
positive incentives you have in mind?
Yeah, absolutely. If you look at procurement, I know that it's
quite infrastructure specific, so the others that aren't captured in this might be
your liquor store owners and things like that, small operators.
But in terms of the carrot, if we're
incentivizing good outcomes for companies to provide for
their workers, that can come through the procurement pathway.
So I know that, for instance, Auckland Council is doing a bit of work around how
they can
better support contractors to handle better outcomes
through the supply chain. So,
it's more of a procurement incentive-
Right. Gotcha
... so it's probably not something that's going to be handled through the bill,
because that's how it would be addressed in infrastructure.
So a little bit of a different story because of how heavily public sector
interactive
the work relationship is and the tendering process is for contractors.
If you look at ISO systems,
actually, so I do have a couple of examples though.
If you look at labor hire, for example, that's probably quite a critical part of
the conversation-
Yeah
... because that's when the risk is kind of subcontracted out from the person that
holds the contract, or from the client to the person that holds the head contract,
through to the person or company that's supplying the labor for that contract.
And
if we can enable good practice through that, that's
really the space where it's going to start making a difference when the rubber hits
the road
if we do come in with
reporting elements under this legislation.
So I think there are a couple of other systems where a tick box is the outcome.
And I think if we can say with
clarity, "These are good standards.
These are standards that everyone can get behind,"
that's when we can be successful in getting some better outcomes
through it.
Yeah.
So that's probably what I mean when I talk about incentivizing better outcomes.
Mm.
Everyone's got to be on the same page and kind of, yeah, and-
That's great. Thank you very much.
Yeah.
Thanks, Fraser.
Any more questions, colleagues? No. All right. Thanks for your time, Fraser.
Appreciate it.
Okay. Thanks, Phil. Goodbye.
Cheers.
Okay.
Next up, we have a submission from Scales
Corporation Limited, Mr Apple, New Zealand Limited.
Hello, Gary
Hey, Chair.
Well, thank you very much.
Welcome to our subcommittee.
Thank you, and good afternoon, Committee.
Look, again, I've been listening to a few of the submissions and
discussions, and there's some good commonality.
I think we support some of the a lot of stuff which is being said.
Yeah, we support the bill fundamentally,
as
a company which has got global reach across a number of continents, that's been
in supply chains exporting to a number of areas with their own
jurisdictions and regulations in these areas.
We absolutely want to have some sort of harmony between those requirements.
And I think with a lot of history in this space,
yeah, we have some practical
advice perhaps for how the bill might be able to meet
its intent.
So look, there's probably three key areas we're interested in discussing
or focusing on.
And it's starting with the reasonable and proportionate
steps around the penalties, the potential for director
and senior management liability.
But we need some clear understanding of what good is and what due diligence
looks like in practice, especially with these very, very complex
supply chains. And we'd note that within the other jurisdictions
and supply chains that we're involved in that are requiring these sort of
requirements, there's been a number of years to build the
maturity of the systems to actually be able to look deep into those.
So it's sort of looking at do we want shallow and quick, or do we want
sort of longer and deeper and more effective?
Yeah, where there's failures, we want to know is there a distinction between the
critical ones of where someone's acted recklessly or it's been
systemic,
versus good faith and reasonable steps where issues may not have been
foreseeable. Because if we don't have something understanding a
distinction between those, we're going to be at the risk of disproportional
penalties,
lack of transparency, defensive positions, box ticking.
We've heard much of this as well, and we see this in some of the requirements we
see offshore, and less thorough, perhaps,
legislation. So a reasonable steps framework is
needed. And we need to understand enforcement
and that it's targeted at serious
failures, and where people know that they should be acting better.
So people should be judged, I think, on their actions, not just the presence of an
issue. So the second area is regulation of international assurance system or
recognition of international assurance systems.
I've mentioned that we're involved in a number of these.
They continue to grow,
and different retailers across the planet are asking us to do
much more almost every few weeks.
These are often independent
global proxies for regulators. They're audited
assurance systems. There's a lot of it around global human rights and due
diligence frameworks. They identify and manage labor risks.
They provide corrective actions and continuous improvements, and
including
what we discussed a little bit, I think, today, around grievance mechanisms and
worker voices to elevate those.
So these are operational. We're very experienced in these.
They capture a lot of data.
They can provide very standardized and scalable inputs
into reporting.
And they are adapting, as I've mentioned, to global regulatory change as that
occurs.
So this is important around-Lack of duplication
reporting, lower costs, and we
would like to see something recognizing these systems
within legislation.
Lastly, and it's quite pertinent today because New Zealand Apples and Pears, our
industry organization, has announced a working group in this space.
We've sort of been asking them a little bit to do it, but they're looking at a
working group which is going to start to address private standards, particularly
around global due diligence and human rights, which is slightly
additional to the modern slavery legislation.
But that's their call, not necessarily because of this legislation, it's the call
because of the ongoing requirements of our supply chains in this
area of social practice. So we want to see proactive work around
this space. What I believe, it's been mentioned many times, is all the small
players that are caught up in this, they
don't get a get out of jail free card.
They're going to be asked by us and others around how they are doing things within
their supply chains or within their particular component of it.
And what I've looked at over the years is there's a real risk here that
they don't have solutions which are at hand
easily for a business of these smaller sizes.
And industry organizations have the opportunity to create scalable solutions,
scalable
analysis of supply chains, and scalable frameworks which can support
this, therefore with scale, at lower costs and
commonality, and also the capacity to train people to deliver
on these, because a reporting system can be very
fragmented with lots of duplication and inconsistent standards.
So look, I could go on. I'm very passionate about this
area. It's an important area. But look, I'd like to take some questions, if
you've got them.
Thanks, Gary. Very practical
commentary.
Craig?
Yeah, as always. Yeah, thanks, Phil. Thank you very much for that.
And just checking, you were speaking, there was a lot of overlap
in terms of the recommendations or the,
and reports from Mr. Apple to Scales Corporation.
Is that right? So you were speaking to both of them?
Mr. Apple's owned by Scales Corporation and-
All right. Excellent
... yeah, thank you.
Okay, thank you.
Yeah, no, I don't actually have any, and you've been very, very clear both
in those two written submissions and what you've said there.
And you've really got me thinking about how is it that if
we're going to, if the bill is going to push on,
in the area of DD,
to what degree can we, in our definition of
acceptable DD, take account of
all the things that you're talking about?
So, if you're a membership of an industry association that's doing that
kind of work, if you've got established practices.
Yeah. You've got my mind churning,
in terms of how
that could be included. So I'll be asking the officials
after this public hearing to do some more work on that.
So thank you very, very much.
Thanks, Craig. Look, if I may add to that, I was involved at New Zealand Apples and
Pears years ago with Rob Fyfe in one of the original working
groups in this space.
Mm-hmm.
And look, we flagged the challenge that on one side
you ask for stuff, but on the other side you need to provide some support
around capacity and capability.
Mm-hmm.
And us at the top end and being large businesses, just
demanding stuff from our supply chain.
We see that coming from offshore every day.
They're doing stock take and tick boxes around, "Are you doing this?
Are you doing that?" The key to it is really to empower the whole supply chain.
And so I think, you've got a demand side
act here which will pull a lot of stuff, but what I think at the bottom is you've
got to have stuff that can be drawn into that, that provides those
players along that supply chain stuff that they can actually tangibly
understand how they can be better businesses.
And so I'd just ask the committee to look at both sides of this
when they start to craft the supporting material for the
bill.
Yeah.
Gary, can I ask you something? As a
big successful exporter, could you imagine
a not too distant world where New Zealand's
brand offering included
its human rights record and its performance in relation to things
like modern slavery?
Absolutely. Yeah. Look, the
way we've developed our primary sectors is being very, very good at what we
produce. And we've got around the table and be able to sell that with
retailers because of our reputation around environmental
stewardship.
Mm-hmm.
It's taken a little bit around about social stewardship, but we can't
hide the requirements now from our supply chains demand we
demonstrate that.
Mm-hmm.
And that's really
big retailers across the world. We're being asked by Walmart
to provide information on how we provide Sam's Club in China-
Mm-hmm
... their social practices. So there's nowhere to hide
from this.
So joining the two bits in terms of our domestic regulation and having a
global view into how it impacts, I think will be very,
very good to create a very elegant piece of legislation.
And look, we should lead in this space.
It would be great if we showed how to put a piece of legislation together which
really brought everyone into that in an effective way.
Thanks for your time, Gary, and excellent submission.
Thank you.
Okay.
We now have
Rebecca Kingi. Is that right?
From...
From Rebecca Kingi.
From Rebecca Kingi. Yes. That's a coincidence, isn't it?
Hello, Rebecca.
Good afternoon. Hi, everybody.
Welcome. Welcome to our subcommittee on the Modern Slavery Bill.
Rebecca, you've got five minutes, and we'd love to be able to ask you questions
within that time.
Thank you, and I just apologize in advance.
I'm actually on parental leave, so there's a few baby babbles happening in the
background-
No worries
... given the context. Thank you very much for the time today.
I'm going to take the submission as read, and we just wanted to highlight a
few comments from hearing a really sort of consistent stream of thought from other
submitters come through and just commend, I guess, the level of detail and
pragmatic recommendations that are coming through.
I think in reality, there's some really clear things that can take
place to actually keep this legislation moving forward and be a
great fit for the New Zealand context.
As much as we're here trying to play on the global stage and be competitive and
compatible, we also can make things as pragmatic and,
I guess, effective as possible for our stakeholders here at home, right?
And that includes the entities that are going to be captured.
It includes the trickle-down of smaller entities through the due diligence or
activity that will take place. And it also includes survivors and victims that are
actually both here domestically and offshore.
So I think the first is the clarity around definitions.
I've seen across many submissions, there's been really good recommendations around
that, so making sure entities are comfortable with the scope of what they're being
asked to do. And I think actually that's exactly what this process is here for.
And thank goodness you have a great democratic process with select committee.
So a really easy way to make this bill stronger already is get clarity
there. And I think the second is actually very clear guidance and
even perhaps needing to be in the primary legislation clearer, the pragmatic way
to do this and the way that's actually intended in the business of human rights
and the corporate world, and that is that
proportionality approach. Making sure that businesses
understand this is not trying to unduly burden a regime
that isn't actually going to be achievable in practice.
But it's a very
reasonable approach to ensure that salient risk recognition is taking
place here. And the example I use as a very clear metaphor is when you go fishing,
there are fish all through the ocean, but you target your catch and that's where
you target to make sure that you're going to have the most effective fishing trip.
And it's kind of similar here. That doesn't mean you ignore good catches on the way
if you come across them with your risk due diligence, but you're really strategic
in the way you approach this. And I sort of state that to give comfort to the
committee as well as to potential reporting entities when they feel
concerned perhaps that there could be a whole load of work that comes with this.
But it's like, no, actually, this is a regime that seeks to be incredibly practical
in the way that it's administered.
So what we do need, though, there is clarity for those entities as to how to take
that approach, as to how to have a salient risk-based model,
and using the UN Guiding Principles of Human Rights as kind of the cornerstone to
do that. So I think that's come through in many submissions, and I just want to
sort of echo that point. Let's make that guidance really clear, not on just how to
do it, but also how to engage with entities across the supply chain.
The second point I'm going to go straight to, because I'm
here in my individual capacity today, so I've got five minutes, and that's victim
support. You may look at my submission and think, "Oh, that's a nice fluffy thing
to have, but it's not really relevant to this regime." It's incredibly relevant to
this regime because New Zealand entities are going to find cases of modern
slavery domestically, and they're not going to have clarity as to who to report
them to and how to assist with remedy without there being a clear support
framework for those victims. And I will say I have spent time working in the New
Zealand government trafficking persons team, so I've seen these cases firsthand,
and I'm incredibly concerned about the gaps we have.
There's international precedents do that.
The UK takes a holistic approach, and I think if we look at our domestic context,
we really need to prioritize that, of course, for the sake of the victims, but also
for the sake of entities that are going to be trying to do a good job here and are
going to be left scrambling with nowhere to refer these cases.
I'll stop, and it's been a very fast stop because I'm trying to fit in what I can
in five minutes. But do you have any questions you'd like to ask?
I think there's time for one question, I think.
Greg, you look like you've got one on the tip of your tongue.
Oh, can I just say how cool it is, Vicky, to see you on the screen submitting on
this bill that literally wouldn't have happened without you.
So have you had a chance to follow, I guess, in between
parent duties,
some of the pushback today around due diligence?
In terms of the, do you mean, Greg, both the pushback and some calling for it and
some saying keep with disclosure?
Yeah, correct. Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah. So some people pushing back very hard, including Ralph Simpson,
on just saying that it's unrealistic to ask that of
companies, and
it's something that the state itself needs to focus on, on
getting its house in order before it asks that of private companies.
Yes. What's the specific ask you have of me in terms of is it
what I think about that?
Yeah, like in the couple of moments that you've got, could you reinforce
for us the reason as to why due diligence is something that it would--
Because this is something that you've wanted the bill, to push towards due
diligence,
from its inception.
I think we cannot
neglect or ignore the global evidence that sits.
And we just have, and the way that New Zealand has been slower to this gives us an
increasing benefit of understanding how this is working out in other regimes.
And I hear a lot about, of course, people wanting to make sure there's not
disproportionate cost burden, and so it's actually wanting to make sure everybody
gets the right bang for their buck, right?
And I think if you weigh up that concept of proportionality and prioritization with
due diligence, it actually becomes almost an
easier pill to swallow. And perhaps
some of the fear around that being burdensome can be understood when you do have a
reasonable approach embedded in it.
I do think as well we can recognize New Zealand's on a journey.
And I don't know, Greg, I'm in the business of win-wins.
Uh-huh.
We can work out how to implement it in a way where businesses are supported to get
there, whether that's in the timing we get there.
That's also very much making sure that there's such support around how to do it,
tools, practical guidance, things like that.
But I do think that is the direction of travel New Zealand has to be on, because
otherwise we're going to get left off the bus.
Right. Okay.
Thank you. Thank you, Rebecca.
Thank you. Thanks so much, Vicky.
Thanks for your submission.
All right, colleagues, the last submission in this session
is from the Law Association, and we have
Shi Sheng Kai and Bridgette
MortonGood afternoon.
Good afternoon.
Welcome.
Thank you.
I guess we have got both of us online.
So we are representing today the Law Association of New Zealand.
We're an independent legal membership association representing over
10,000 lawyers across New Zealand.
A key part of our work is our volunteer lawyer committees, and we're submitting on
behalf of three of those sub-committees today.
The one that I sit on, which is the Public Administrative Law Committee, and
the one that Sush sits on, which is the Employment and Immigration
Committee. So we're conscious of not taking up too much of your
time. So in terms of the Public Law
and Administration Committee, the key thing for us, in terms of the submission,
is looking at that proportionality between the regulatory burden and the
outcomes. We support the overall intent of the bill, but we think there is
efficiency to be gained in terms of aligning ourselves with
international comparative
systems. And we also think that there's efficiencies that would be
gained and possibly better outcomes gained if the implementation period
for this could be lengthened. I'll hand over to Sush
to cover off on the other committees.
Cool. Thanks, Bridget. On behalf of the TLANZ Immigration and
Refugee Committee, our position is that modern slavery and migrant
exploitation are deeply intertwined in the New Zealand context.
Migrant workers may be especially vulnerable where their ability to
remain in New Zealand is tied to a particular employer, where they have
incurred significant recruitment debt or are bonded for financial support
associated with relocation costs, where they lack information
about employment rights, where English is not their first language, or where they
fear that reporting exploitation will result in visa cancellation,
deportation, or loss of future residence prospects.
We believe,
therefore, that the bill should do more to require a higher
level of scrutiny at the supply chain level, reporting level.
It must connect clearly with the immigration setting through which
exploitation is identified, reported, investigated, and
remedied. The bill should also capture possible migrant
exploitation that could occur through triangular employment,
where migrant workers that are hired out to medium and large employers
could be subject
to migrant exploitation by either their direct employment or the
entity that they have been assigned to work at.
In essence, with the recommendations, there are two levels.
One, which is the reporting threshold.
So Clause 6 defines the threshold revenue amount as
consolidated revenue exceeding 100 million in a reporting period.
Our committee considers that the threshold is too high.
The policy history strongly supports a lower threshold.
The MB's discussion document proposes a graduated framework
in which medium entities, where those entities have
20 million or more in revenue are also subject
to a level of reporting. And in
essence, our recommendation at this point is
that the threshold should be reduced to 20 million.
We also recommend, in respect to the definition of supply chain,
a wider or express mention to
allow the capturing of labor supply.
So,
I think at the moment,
the 2022 MB consultation materials define supply chain quite
broadly,
and it could cover, for example, a supply chain of goods.
But it would be, I think, in our committee's opinion,
a better position to have an express inclusion of labor supply chain.
And this is because there will be instances, or potentially there has been
instances, where
there has been migrant exploitation at the labor
hire level,
not associated directly with, let's say, a larger or medium-sized entity,
and it would be positive if
those labor hire supply chains would be captured by the
definition of
supply chain.
And that would be, I think, our committee's recommendation.
Are there any questions?
Yeah.
Back to you, Bridget.
Greg, you go first, yeah.
No, no, you go for it. I was just going to ask you just around the thresholds.
Hmm. Yeah,
my question was really
from a legislative perspective and having the kind of the right tool for the
job,
as a bill that is fundamentally about
really trying to change the behavior of
companies,
and the way they manage their supply chains,
is that the right vehicle
for
a sort of catch-all approach to trying to deal with the worst, most
exploitative forms of labor practice in New
Zealand?
I can take this one if you want, Sush.
Yeah, you go for it, Bridget.
I think there's an awareness that legislation is part of an
overall program, that this is transparency and
accountability on behalf of our largest companies or
organizations. I think it would be naive to think that this will
therefore
capture and therefore get rid of modern slavery.
I think it's not going to happen, but it is another tool in the
toolbox. I think the risk always with a legislative
regime that calls for essentially a reporting regime is the
risk that you
tick that box and therefore feel that you have complied with that.
So it is still really important that we still have education, we still have
support. The previous submitter talked about, I think, that victim support side of
it. Those people are most vulnerable to come particularly into the country, and how
we're making sure we're looking after them is probably just as key as having
legislation in place.
Hmm. Thank you. Greg.
Yeah, I'm just interested in the
20 million is definitely the lowest threshold
that we've heard a call for. You'll be aware,
obviously, that that-For a
while in the proposed legislation was 50,
but it's now sitting at 100. $20 million,
yeah, is by your own analysis, including 4,000 entities.
It seems very, very ambitious,
and particularly on an untested reporting regime.
What would your thoughts be about taking a graduated approach?
So leaving the threshold
within regulations within the bill, and then having
that as a review matter in three years' time when
we've all had a better chance to see how burdensome
reporting is.
Brigitte, would you like to take that or would you like me to answer?
You take that one, Christopher. Have a go. Okay, cool. I'll have a go.
I think, based on our committee's sort of research, and
sort of work, we just looked into the MBIE's
2022 discussion document
with the sort of proposed framework.
I think there was some research potentially by the University of Otago,
and
I think it was one of those revision of questions, and I think
the direction is,
well, the question should potentially be,
at what level an entity has sufficient scale, procurement activity, and
contractual leverage or labor market influence to
identify and manage risk, including migrant exploitation.
If we maybe refocus it that way and then reflect on the
smaller size of New Zealand,
I think, comparatively, I think, globally, like a
US company that small might be large by New Zealand standards, would
take that approach.
Potentially, I think our position is that
the risk threshold should be reduced to 20 million, just taking that
global approach and just sort of changing that question in terms of in New
Zealand, at what level an entity has the ability
to
have sufficient scale to be able to do this due diligence.
And potentially at the 20 million level, with the immigration system
in New Zealand,
to become accredited, you go through a checklist and you tick off all the boxes
anyway.
Okay. Yeah, no, I appreciate it. Australia's is 100, and
we spoke to their modern slavery commissioner earlier today, and he wasn't in
favor of it coming down. So if we were at 20, allowing for the current
exchange rate, would be almost six times
their threshold or six times this, but yeah.
Mm-hmm.
No, I appreciate your, the matrix for
arriving at that is really helpful. Thank you.
Cool. Thanks, Craig.
All right. Doesn't look like there's any more questions, but thank you for an
excellent submission.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Cool, thanks.